---
title: Infection topics in the 1911 Britannica encyclopaedia
date: 2025-04-28
---

I enjoy reading old infection literature such as textbooks --- I find they are often have easy-to-read prose that is sadly missing from modern works. Contemporary texts, especially textbooks, try to present facts objectively, referenced where possible. While this is admirable and understandable, it can lead to literature that is dry and not very inspriring to read. Older books were often the works of a single author (or at most, no more than a handful) --- while the content tended to be heavily opinionated and not necessarily evidence-based in the modern sense, the books made a great read. 

A great example of such a textbook is Infectious Diseases: Epidemiology and Clinical Practice by [A. B. Christie](https://history.rcp.ac.uk/inspiring-physicians/andrew-barnett-christie) (1909--1991), who was an infectious diseases clinician in Liverpool. The second edition starts with the following opening line:

    Man is a creature composed of countless millions of cells : a microbe is composed of only one, yet throughout the ages the two have been in ceaseless conflict. 

Brilliant. Each chapter is introduced with a unique prose that sets the scene and captures the reader's attention. In contrast, modern works usually jump straight to the medical content. Nothing wrong with that, but also less memorable. Take, for example, this opening to the chapter on enterovirus infections:

    There may be much or little in a name. The village of Coxsackie is known to medical science only becuase it was there that viruses, distinct from poliovirus and with marked pathogenicity for suckling mice, were first isolated from the faeces of two children suffering from poliomyelitis. The newly discovered agents were given the name of Coxsackie viruses. From the taxonomic point of view the term is meaningless, but it has an attractive sound in addition to its historic interest and so it survives.

Much of the infectious disease and microbiology knowledge that we teach and learn today was derived early in the 20^th^ century. Topics such as the clinical descriptions of important infectious diseases, the identification of microbes through their phenotypic characteristics, and the epidemiological control of disease transmission have changed little in the century since. Indeed, the material found in modern textbooks or passed on through generations of clinicians is rooted in this era of medicine. Returning to these texts helps reinforce these concepts that we rely on nowadays, or on the other hand, allows us to challenge assumptions that may have been based on very little evidence. Following the natural history of medicine is also a great way to learn --- for example, there is no better approach to understanding the use of antimicrobial therapy than tracing the chronological release of each agent, and the inevitable subsequent emergence of resistance to said agent.
